README.md, before:

# openai-structured

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/openai-structured.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/openai-structured)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/openai-structured)](https://pypi.org/project/openai-structured/)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/openai-structured/badge/?version=latest)](https://openai-structured.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured/actions/workflows/python-package.yml)

A Python library for working with [OpenAI Structured Outputs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling) using Pydantic models.

## Key Features

* **Structured Output:** Get structured data using OpenAI Structured Outputs with Pydantic models
* **Efficient Streaming:** Built-in streaming support for optimal performance
* **Type Safety:** Full type hints and Pydantic validation
* **Simple API:** Clean and intuitive interface
* **Error Handling:** Comprehensive error handling with specific error types
* **Modern:** Built for OpenAI's latest API and Python 3.9+
* **CLI Tool:** Powerful command-line interface for structured API calls

## Requirements

* Python 3.9 or higher
* OpenAI API key

### Dependencies

These will be installed automatically:

* `openai>=1.12.0`: OpenAI Python SDK
* `pydantic>=2.6.3`: Data validation
* `ijson>=3.2.3`: Efficient JSON streaming
* `tiktoken>=0.6.0`: Token counting and validation

## Installation

### Using pip

```bash
pip install openai-structured
```

### Using Poetry (recommended for development)

```bash
# Install Poetry if you haven't already
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -

# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured.git
cd openai-structured

# Install dependencies
poetry install

# Activate the virtual environment
poetry shell
```

## Command-Line Interface

The CLI provides a powerful way to make structured API calls from the command line:

```bash
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "You are a helpful assistant" \
  --template "Analyze this text: {input}" \
  --file input=data.txt \
  --schema-file schema.json \
  --model gpt-4o \
  --output-file result.json
```

### Key CLI Features

* **Streaming by Default:** All responses are streamed for optimal performance
* **File Input:** Process multiple input files with template placeholders
* **Schema Validation:** Automatic JSON schema validation
* **Token Management:** Automatic token counting and limit validation
* **Flexible Output:** Write to file or stdout with progress indication

### CLI Arguments

Required:

```bash
--system-prompt TEXT    # System prompt for the model
--template TEXT        # Template with {file} placeholders
--schema-file PATH     # JSON schema for response structure
```

Input:

```bash
--file NAME=PATH      # File mapping (name=path), use multiple times
                      # Example: --file input=data.txt
```

Model Configuration:

```bash
--model TEXT          # Model to use (default: gpt-4o-2024-08-06)
--temperature FLOAT   # Temperature (default: 0.0)
--max-tokens INT      # Max tokens (default: model-specific)
--top-p FLOAT        # Top-p sampling (default: 1.0)
--timeout FLOAT      # API timeout in seconds (default: 60.0)
```

Output and Logging:

```bash
--output-file PATH    # Write JSON output to file
--verbose            # Enable detailed logging
--validate-schema    # Validate schema and response
```

Authentication:

```bash
--api-key TEXT       # OpenAI API key (overrides env var)
```

## Supported Models

The library supports models with [OpenAI Structured Outputs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling) capabilities:

### Production Models (Recommended)

* `gpt-4o-2024-08-06`: GPT-4 with OpenAI Structured Outputs
  * 128K context window
  * 16K output tokens
  * Full JSON schema support

* `gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18`: Smaller GPT-4 variant
  * 128K context window
  * 16K output tokens
  * Optimized for faster responses

* `o1-2024-12-17`: Optimized for structured data
  * 200K context window
  * 100K output tokens
  * Best for large structured outputs

### Development Aliases

* `gpt-4o`: Latest GPT-4 structured model
* `gpt-4o-mini`: Latest mini variant
* `o1`: Latest optimized model

Note: Use dated versions in production for stability. Aliases automatically use the latest compatible version.

## Error Handling

The library provides comprehensive error handling with specific exception types:

```python
from openai_structured import (
    OpenAIClientError,        # Base class for all errors
    ModelNotSupportedError,   # Model doesn't support structured output
    ModelVersionError,        # Model version not supported
    APIResponseError,         # API call failures
    InvalidResponseFormatError,  # Response format issues
    EmptyResponseError,       # Empty response from API
    JSONParseError,          # JSON parsing failures
    StreamInterruptedError,   # Stream interruption
    StreamBufferError,        # Buffer management issues
    StreamParseError,        # Stream parsing failures
    BufferOverflowError,     # Buffer size exceeded
)

try:
    result = openai_structured_call(...)
except ModelNotSupportedError as e:
    print(f"Model not supported: {e}")
except StreamInterruptedError as e:
    print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
except StreamParseError as e:
    print(f"Stream parse error after {e.attempts} attempts: {e}")
except OpenAIClientError as e:
    print(f"General error: {e}")
```

## Python API

### Basic Usage

```python
from typing import List
from openai import OpenAI
from openai_structured import openai_structured_stream
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

class TodoItem(BaseModel):
    """A single todo item with priority."""
    task: str = Field(..., description="The task description")
    priority: str = Field(..., pattern="^(high|medium|low)$")

class TodoList(BaseModel):
    """A list of todo items."""
    items: List[TodoItem]
    total_count: int = Field(..., ge=0)

# Initialize client
client = OpenAI()  # Uses OPENAI_API_KEY environment variable

# Process streamed response using OpenAI Structured Outputs
async for result in openai_structured_stream(
    client=client,
    model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
    output_schema=TodoList,
    user_prompt="Create a todo list with 3 items",
    system_prompt="Generate a todo list with priorities"
):
    # Type-safe access to response
    for item in result.items:
        print(f"Task: {item.task}, Priority: {item.priority}")
    print(f"Total items: {result.total_count}")
```

### Stream Configuration

Control streaming behavior with `StreamConfig`:

```python
from openai_structured import StreamConfig, openai_structured_stream

stream_config = StreamConfig(
    max_buffer_size=1024 * 1024,  # 1MB max buffer
    cleanup_threshold=512 * 1024,  # Clean up at 512KB
    chunk_size=8192,  # 8KB chunks
)

async for result in openai_structured_stream(
    client=client,
    model="gpt-4o",
    output_schema=MySchema,
    system_prompt="...",
    user_prompt="...",
    stream_config=stream_config,
):
    process_result(result)
```

### Production Best Practices

1. Use dated model versions for stability:

```python
model = "gpt-4o-2024-08-06"  # Instead of "gpt-4o"
```

2. Implement retries for resilience:

```python
from tenacity import retry, stop_after_attempt, wait_exponential

@retry(stop=stop_after_attempt(3), wait=wait_exponential())
async def resilient_call():
    async for result in openai_structured_stream(...):
        yield result
```

3. Add rate limiting:

```python
from asyncio_throttle import Throttler

async with Throttler(rate_limit=100, period=60):
    async for result in openai_structured_stream(...):
        process_result(result)
```

4. Handle all error types:

```python
try:
    async for result in openai_structured_stream(...):
        process_result(result)
except StreamInterruptedError:
    handle_interruption()
except StreamBufferError:
    handle_buffer_issue()
except OpenAIClientError as e:
    handle_general_error(e)
finally:
    cleanup_resources()
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
OPENAI_API_BASE=https://api.openai.com/v1  # Optional custom endpoint
OPENAI_API_VERSION=2024-02-01  # Optional API version
```

### Python Version Support

* Python 3.9+
* Tested on CPython implementations
* Compatible with Linux, macOS, and Windows

## Documentation

For full documentation, visit [openai-structured.readthedocs.io](https://openai-structured.readthedocs.io/).

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [`LICENSE`](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Update Documentation and Configuration for CLI and API
- Changed CLI entry point in pyproject.toml to cli_main.
- Updated README.md to reflect correct CLI usage and async function calls.
- Enhanced API documentation in api.rst with updated function signatures and error handling.
- Improved CLI documentation in cli.rst with detailed option descriptions and error handling.

README.md, after:

# openai-structured

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/openai-structured.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/openai-structured)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/openai-structured)](https://pypi.org/project/openai-structured/)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/openai-structured/badge/?version=latest)](https://openai-structured.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured/actions/workflows/python-package.yml)

A Python library for working with [OpenAI Structured Outputs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling) using Pydantic models.

## Key Features

* **Structured Output:** Get structured data using OpenAI Structured Outputs with Pydantic models
* **Efficient Streaming:** Built-in streaming support for optimal performance
* **Type Safety:** Full type hints and Pydantic validation
* **Simple API:** Clean and intuitive interface
* **Error Handling:** Comprehensive error handling with specific error types
* **Modern:** Built for OpenAI's latest API and Python 3.9+
* **CLI Tool:** Powerful command-line interface for structured API calls

## Requirements

* Python 3.9 or higher
* OpenAI API key

### Dependencies

These will be installed automatically:

* `openai>=1.12.0`: OpenAI Python SDK
* `pydantic>=2.6.3`: Data validation
* `ijson>=3.2.3`: Efficient JSON streaming
* `tiktoken>=0.6.0`: Token counting and validation

## Installation

### Using pip

```bash
pip install openai-structured
```

### Using Poetry (recommended for development)

```bash
# Install Poetry if you haven't already
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -

# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yaniv-golan/openai-structured.git
cd openai-structured

# Install dependencies
poetry install

# Activate the virtual environment
poetry shell
```

## Command-Line Interface

The CLI provides a powerful way to make structured API calls from the command line:

```bash
ostruct \
  --system-prompt "You are a helpful assistant" \
  --template "Analyze this text: {input}" \
  --file input=data.txt \
  --schema-file schema.json \
  --model gpt-4o \
  --output-file result.json
```

### Key CLI Features

* **Streaming by Default:** All responses are streamed for optimal performance
* **File Input:** Process multiple input files with template placeholders
* **Schema Validation:** Automatic JSON schema validation
* **Token Management:** Automatic token counting and limit validation
* **Flexible Output:** Write to file or stdout with progress indication

### CLI Arguments

Required:

```bash
--system-prompt TEXT    # System prompt for the model
--template TEXT        # Template with {file} placeholders
--schema-file PATH     # JSON schema for response structure
```

Input:

```bash
--file NAME=PATH      # File mapping (name=path), use multiple times
                      # Example: --file input=data.txt
```

Model Configuration:

```bash
--model TEXT          # Model to use (default: gpt-4o-2024-08-06)
--temperature FLOAT   # Temperature (default: 0.0)
--max-tokens INT      # Max tokens (default: model-specific)
--top-p FLOAT        # Top-p sampling (default: 1.0)
--timeout FLOAT      # API timeout in seconds (default: 60.0)
```

Output and Logging:

```bash
--output-file PATH    # Write JSON output to file
--verbose            # Enable detailed logging
--validate-schema    # Validate schema and response
```

Authentication:

```bash
--api-key TEXT       # OpenAI API key (overrides env var)
```

## Supported Models

The library supports models with [OpenAI Structured Outputs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling) capabilities:

### Production Models (Recommended)

* `gpt-4o-2024-08-06`: GPT-4 with OpenAI Structured Outputs
  * 128K context window
  * 16K output tokens
  * Full JSON schema support

* `gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18`: Smaller GPT-4 variant
  * 128K context window
  * 16K output tokens
  * Optimized for faster responses

* `o1-2024-12-17`: Optimized for structured data
  * 200K context window
  * 100K output tokens
  * Best for large structured outputs

### Development Aliases

* `gpt-4o`: Latest GPT-4 structured model
* `gpt-4o-mini`: Latest mini variant
* `o1`: Latest optimized model

Note: Use dated versions in production for stability. Aliases automatically use the latest compatible version.

## Error Handling

The library provides comprehensive error handling with specific exception types:

```python
from openai_structured import (
    OpenAIClientError,        # Base class for all errors
    ModelNotSupportedError,   # Model doesn't support structured output
    ModelVersionError,        # Model version not supported
    APIResponseError,         # API call failures
    InvalidResponseFormatError,  # Response format issues
    EmptyResponseError,       # Empty response from API
    JSONParseError,          # JSON parsing failures
    StreamInterruptedError,   # Stream interruption
    StreamBufferError,        # Buffer management issues
    StreamParseError,        # Stream parsing failures
    BufferOverflowError,     # Buffer size exceeded
    TokenLimitError,         # ValueError: Token limit exceeded
)

try:
    result = openai_structured_call(...)
except ModelNotSupportedError as e:
    print(f"Model not supported: {e}")
except StreamInterruptedError as e:
    print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
except StreamParseError as e:
    print(f"Stream parse error after {e.attempts} attempts: {e}")
except OpenAIClientError as e:
    print(f"General error: {e}")
```

## Python API

### Basic Usage

```python
from typing import List
from openai import OpenAI
from openai_structured import async_openai_structured_stream
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

class TodoItem(BaseModel):
    """A single todo item with priority."""
    task: str = Field(..., description="The task description")
    priority: str = Field(..., pattern="^(high|medium|low)$")

class TodoList(BaseModel):
    """A list of todo items."""
    items: List[TodoItem]
    total_count: int = Field(..., ge=0)

# Initialize client
client = OpenAI()  # Uses OPENAI_API_KEY environment variable

# Process streamed response using OpenAI Structured Outputs
async for result in async_openai_structured_stream(
    client=client,
    model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
    output_schema=TodoList,
    user_prompt="Create a todo list with 3 items",
    system_prompt="Generate a todo list with priorities"
):
    # Type-safe access to response
    for item in result.items:
        print(f"Task: {item.task}, Priority: {item.priority}")
    print(f"Total items: {result.total_count}")
```

### Stream Configuration

Control streaming behavior with `StreamConfig`:

```python
from openai_structured import StreamConfig, async_openai_structured_stream

stream_config = StreamConfig(
    max_buffer_size=1024 * 1024,  # 1MB max buffer
    cleanup_threshold=512 * 1024,  # Clean up at 512KB
    chunk_size=8192,  # 8KB chunks
)

async for result in async_openai_structured_stream(
    client=client,
    model="gpt-4o",
    output_schema=MySchema,
    system_prompt="...",
    user_prompt="...",
    stream_config=stream_config,
):
    process_result(result)
```

### Production Best Practices

1. Use dated model versions for stability:

```python
model = "gpt-4o-2024-08-06"  # Instead of "gpt-4o"
```

2. Implement retries for resilience:

```python
from tenacity import retry, stop_after_attempt, wait_exponential

@retry(stop=stop_after_attempt(3), wait=wait_exponential())
async def resilient_call():
    async for result in async_openai_structured_stream(...):
        yield result
```

3. Add rate limiting:

```python
from asyncio_throttle import Throttler

async with Throttler(rate_limit=100, period=60):
    async for result in async_openai_structured_stream(...):
        process_result(result)
```

4. Handle all error types:

```python
try:
    async for result in async_openai_structured_stream(...):
        process_result(result)
except StreamInterruptedError:
    handle_interruption()
except StreamBufferError:
    handle_buffer_issue()
except OpenAIClientError as e:
    handle_general_error(e)
finally:
    cleanup_resources()
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
OPENAI_API_BASE=https://api.openai.com/v1  # Optional custom endpoint
OPENAI_API_VERSION=2024-02-01  # Optional API version
```

### Python Version Support

* Python 3.9+
* Tested on CPython implementations
* Compatible with Linux, macOS, and Windows

## Documentation

For full documentation, visit [openai-structured.readthedocs.io](https://openai-structured.readthedocs.io/).

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [`LICENSE`](LICENSE) file for details.
