docs/source/quickstart.rst, before:

.. Copyright (c) 2025 Yaniv Golan. All rights reserved.

Quickstart
=========

Installation
-----------

Using pip::

    pip install openai-structured

Using Poetry::

    poetry add openai-structured

Basic Usage
----------

The library provides a simple way to extract structured data from OpenAI models:

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
    from openai_structured import async_openai_structured_stream, StreamConfig
    from openai_structured.errors import StreamBufferError, ValidationError

    # Define your output schema
    class MovieReview(BaseModel):
        title: str
        rating: float
        summary: str
        pros: list[str]
        cons: list[str]

    async def analyze_movie():
        # Convert Pydantic model to JSON Schema
        schema = MovieReview.model_json_schema()

        # Prepare messages
        messages = [
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a movie critic."},
            {"role": "user", "content": "Review the movie 'Inception'"}
        ]

        try:
            # Stream the response
            async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
                messages=messages,
                schema=schema,
                model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
                temperature=0.7,
                stream_config=StreamConfig(
                    max_buffer_size=1024 * 1024  # 1MB
                )
            ):
                # Process each chunk as it arrives
                review = MovieReview(**chunk)
                print(f"Processing: {review.title}")
                print(f"Rating: {review.rating}/10")
                print(f"Summary: {review.summary}")
                print("\nPros:")
                for pro in review.pros:
                    print(f"- {pro}")
                print("\nCons:")
                for con in review.cons:
                    print(f"- {con}")

        except ValidationError as e:
            print(f"Invalid response: {e}")
        except StreamBufferError as e:
            print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
        except StreamInterruptedError as e:
            print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
        except TokenLimitError as e:
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")

    # Run the async function
    asyncio.run(analyze_movie())

Stream Configuration
-----------------

Configure streaming behavior:

.. code-block:: python

    from openai_structured import StreamConfig

    # Default configuration
    config = StreamConfig()  # 1MB buffer, 512KB cleanup

    # Custom configuration
    config = StreamConfig(
        max_buffer_size=2 * 1024 * 1024,  # 2MB
        cleanup_threshold=1024 * 1024,     # 1MB
        chunk_size=16 * 1024              # 16KB
    )

    async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
        messages=messages,
        schema=schema,
        stream_config=config
    ):
        process_chunk(chunk)

Error Handling
------------

The library provides robust error handling to help you build resilient applications. Here's a realistic example analyzing sentiment from customer reviews:

.. code-block:: python

    try:
        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            client=client,
            model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
            output_schema=SentimentAnalysis,  # Pydantic model defining the structure
            system_prompt="You are a sentiment analysis expert. You analyze customer reviews to extract sentiment, key phrases, and emotional tone.",
            user_prompt="""Analyze the sentiment in the following customer review. Map the results as follows:
                - Extract the overall sentiment (positive/negative/neutral) into the 'sentiment' field
                - Place the confidence score (0-1) into the 'confidence' field
                - List the key positive phrases in 'positive_phrases'
                - List the key negative phrases in 'negative_phrases'
                - Summarize the emotional tone in 'tone'
                
                Review: {{ review.content }}""",
            file_vars={"review": "customer_review.txt"}
        ):
            process_sentiment_results(chunk)
    except ValueError as e:
        if "token limit" in str(e).lower():
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")
            print("Consider reducing input size or using a model with larger context")
        else:
            raise
    except StreamBufferError as e:
        print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
    except StreamInterruptedError as e:
        print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
    except ValidationError as e:
        print(f"Validation error: {e}")
    except APIError as e:
        print(f"API error: {e}")
    finally:
        await client.close()

**Key Error Types:**

*   **ValueError:**  Can indicate a token limit issue. If you encounter this, check the total token count using the `--verbose` flag in the CLI or by logging the prompt length in your code. Reduce the input size or use a model with a larger context window.
*   **StreamBufferError:** Occurs if the internal buffer for streaming is exceeded. Adjust `StreamConfig` parameters if necessary.
*   **StreamInterruptedError:** Indicates that the stream was interrupted before completion. Implement retries if needed.
*   **ValidationError:**  Signals that the generated output doesn't conform to the provided schema. Review your schema and prompt.
*   **APIError:** Represents an error from the OpenAI API. Check the error message for details and consult the OpenAI documentation.

File Processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Process files efficiently:

.. code-block:: python

    import aiofiles

    async def analyze_file(filepath: str):
        async with aiofiles.open(filepath, 'r') as f:
            content = await f.read()

        messages = [
            {"role": "system", "content": "Analyze this document."},
            {"role": "user", "content": content}
        ]

        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            messages=messages,
            schema=schema,
            model="o1",  # Use optimized model for large files
            timeout=120.0  # Longer timeout for large files
        ):
            await process_chunk(chunk)

Supported Models
--------------

Production Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``gpt-4o-2024-08-06``
    - GPT-4 with structured output
    - 128K context window
    - 16K output tokens
    - Full JSON schema support

* ``gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18``
    - Smaller GPT-4 variant
    - 128K context window
    - 16K output tokens
    - Optimized for faster responses

* ``o1-2024-12-17``
    - Optimized for structured data
    - 200K context window
    - 100K output tokens
    - Best for large structured outputs

* ``o3-mini-2025-01-31``
    - Mini variant optimized for structured data
    - 200K context window
    - 100K output tokens
    - Efficient for large outputs

Development Aliases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``gpt-4o``: Latest GPT-4 structured model
* ``gpt-4o-mini``: Latest mini variant
* ``o1``: Latest optimized model
* ``o3-mini``: Latest mini optimized model

.. note::
    Use dated versions in production for stability.
    Aliases automatically use the latest compatible version.

Environment Variables
------------------

The library uses these environment variables:

* ``OPENAI_API_KEY`` (required)
    OpenAI API key for authentication

* ``OPENAI_API_BASE`` (optional)
    Custom API endpoint URL

* ``OPENAI_API_VERSION`` (optional)
    Specific API version to use 

Advanced Usage
------------

Complex Schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use Pydantic for complex schemas:

.. code-block:: python

    from typing import Literal
    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

    class Character(BaseModel):
        name: str
        age: int = Field(minimum=0, maximum=150)
        occupation: str
        skills: list[str]

    class MovieAnalysis(BaseModel):
        title: str
        rating: float = Field(minimum=0, maximum=10)
        summary: str
        themes: list[str]

    # Convert to JSON Schema
    schema = MovieAnalysis.model_json_schema()

    async def analyze_movie():
        try:
            async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
                messages=[
                    {"role": "system", "content": "Analyze this movie."},
                    {"role": "user", "content": "Analyze 'The Matrix'"}
                ],
                schema=schema
            ):
                analysis = MovieAnalysis(**chunk)
                print(f"Analyzing {analysis.title}...")
                for character in analysis.characters:
                    print(f"- {character.name}: {character.role}")
        except ValidationError as e:
            print(f"Validation error: {e}")

Error Handling
------------

The library provides comprehensive error handling:

.. code-block:: python

    from openai_structured.errors import (
        StreamBufferError,
        StreamInterruptedError,
        ValidationError,
        TokenLimitError
    )

    try:
        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            client=client,
            model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
            output_schema=OutputSchema,
            system_prompt="Analyze this text",
            user_prompt="Sample text to analyze",
        ):
            process_chunk(chunk)
    except ValueError as e:
        if "token limit" in str(e).lower():
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")
            print("Consider reducing input size or using a model with larger context")
        else:
            raise
    except StreamBufferError as e:
        print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
    except StreamInterruptedError as e:
        print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
    except ValidationError as e:
        print(f"Validation error: {e}")
    except APIError as e:
        print(f"API error: {e}")
    finally:
        await client.close()

Commit message:

feat: enforce fixed parameters for o1 and o3 models
- Add validation to prevent modification of fixed parameters for o1 and o3 models
- Set fixed values for temperature (1.0), top_p (1.0), frequency_penalty (0.0),
  and presence_penalty (0.0)
- Add type checking for model parameter
- Add comprehensive tests for parameter enforcement
- Improve error messages for invalid parameter modifications

This change ensures that o1 and o3 models use their required fixed parameters
and provides clear error messages when attempts are made to modify them.

docs/source/quickstart.rst, after:

.. Copyright (c) 2025 Yaniv Golan. All rights reserved.

Quickstart
=========

Installation
-----------

Using pip::

    pip install openai-structured

Using Poetry::

    poetry add openai-structured

Basic Usage
----------

The library provides a simple way to extract structured data from OpenAI models:

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
    from openai_structured import async_openai_structured_stream, StreamConfig
    from openai_structured.errors import StreamBufferError, ValidationError

    # Define your output schema
    class MovieReview(BaseModel):
        title: str
        rating: float
        summary: str
        pros: list[str]
        cons: list[str]

    async def analyze_movie():
        # Convert Pydantic model to JSON Schema
        schema = MovieReview.model_json_schema()

        # Prepare messages
        messages = [
            {"role": "system", "content": "You are a movie critic."},
            {"role": "user", "content": "Review the movie 'Inception'"}
        ]

        try:
            # Stream the response
            async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
                messages=messages,
                schema=schema,
                model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
                temperature=0.7,
                stream_config=StreamConfig(
                    max_buffer_size=1024 * 1024  # 1MB
                )
            ):
                # Process each chunk as it arrives
                review = MovieReview(**chunk)
                print(f"Processing: {review.title}")
                print(f"Rating: {review.rating}/10")
                print(f"Summary: {review.summary}")
                print("\nPros:")
                for pro in review.pros:
                    print(f"- {pro}")
                print("\nCons:")
                for con in review.cons:
                    print(f"- {con}")

        except ValidationError as e:
            print(f"Invalid response: {e}")
        except StreamBufferError as e:
            print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
        except StreamInterruptedError as e:
            print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
        except TokenLimitError as e:
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")

    # Run the async function
    asyncio.run(analyze_movie())

Stream Configuration
-----------------

Configure streaming behavior:

.. code-block:: python

    from openai_structured import StreamConfig

    # Default configuration
    config = StreamConfig()  # 1MB buffer, 512KB cleanup

    # Custom configuration
    config = StreamConfig(
        max_buffer_size=2 * 1024 * 1024,  # 2MB
        cleanup_threshold=1024 * 1024,     # 1MB
        chunk_size=16 * 1024              # 16KB
    )

    async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
        messages=messages,
        schema=schema,
        stream_config=config
    ):
        process_chunk(chunk)

Error Handling
------------

The library provides robust error handling to help you build resilient applications. Here's a realistic example analyzing sentiment from customer reviews:

.. code-block:: python

    try:
        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            client=client,
            model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
            output_schema=SentimentAnalysis,  # Pydantic model defining the structure
            system_prompt="You are a sentiment analysis expert. You analyze customer reviews to extract sentiment, key phrases, and emotional tone.",
            user_prompt="""Analyze the sentiment in the following customer review. Map the results as follows:
                - Extract the overall sentiment (positive/negative/neutral) into the 'sentiment' field
                - Place the confidence score (0-1) into the 'confidence' field
                - List the key positive phrases in 'positive_phrases'
                - List the key negative phrases in 'negative_phrases'
                - Summarize the emotional tone in 'tone'
                
                Review: {{ review.content }}""",
            file_vars={"review": "customer_review.txt"}
        ):
            process_sentiment_results(chunk)
    except ValueError as e:
        if "token limit" in str(e).lower():
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")
            print("Consider reducing input size or using a model with larger context")
        else:
            raise
    except StreamBufferError as e:
        print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
    except StreamInterruptedError as e:
        print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
    except ValidationError as e:
        print(f"Validation error: {e}")
    except APIError as e:
        print(f"API error: {e}")
    finally:
        await client.close()

**Key Error Types:**

*   **ValueError:**  Can indicate a token limit issue. If you encounter this, check the total token count using the `--verbose` flag in the CLI or by logging the prompt length in your code. Reduce the input size or use a model with a larger context window.
*   **StreamBufferError:** Occurs if the internal buffer for streaming is exceeded. Adjust `StreamConfig` parameters if necessary.
*   **StreamInterruptedError:** Indicates that the stream was interrupted before completion. Implement retries if needed.
*   **ValidationError:**  Signals that the generated output doesn't conform to the provided schema. Review your schema and prompt.
*   **APIError:** Represents an error from the OpenAI API. Check the error message for details and consult the OpenAI documentation.

File Processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Process files efficiently:

.. code-block:: python

    import aiofiles

    async def analyze_file(filepath: str):
        async with aiofiles.open(filepath, 'r') as f:
            content = await f.read()

        messages = [
            {"role": "system", "content": "Analyze this document."},
            {"role": "user", "content": content}
        ]

        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            messages=messages,
            schema=schema,
            model="o1",  # Use optimized model for large files
            timeout=120.0  # Longer timeout for large files
        ):
            await process_chunk(chunk)

Supported Models
--------------

Production Models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``gpt-4o-2024-08-06``
    - GPT-4 with structured output
    - 128K context window
    - 16K output tokens
    - Full JSON schema support

* ``gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18``
    - Smaller GPT-4 variant
    - 128K context window
    - 16K output tokens
    - Optimized for faster responses

* ``o1-2024-12-17``
    - Optimized for structured data
    - 200K context window
    - 100K output tokens
    - Fixed parameters (temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0)
    - Best for large structured outputs

* ``o3-mini-2025-01-31``
    - Mini variant optimized for structured data
    - 200K context window
    - 100K output tokens
    - Fixed parameters (temperature=1.0, top_p=1.0)
    - Efficient for large outputs

Development Aliases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``gpt-4o``: Latest GPT-4 structured model
* ``gpt-4o-mini``: Latest mini variant
* ``o1``: Latest optimized model with fixed parameters
* ``o3-mini``: Latest mini optimized model with fixed parameters

.. note::
    o1 and o3 models have fixed parameters that cannot be modified:
    
    - temperature: Fixed at 1.0
    - top_p: Fixed at 1.0
    - frequency_penalty: Fixed at 0.0
    - presence_penalty: Fixed at 0.0
    
    Attempting to modify these parameters will raise an OpenAIClientError.
    Use other models if you need to adjust these parameters.

Environment Variables
------------------

The library uses these environment variables:

* ``OPENAI_API_KEY`` (required)
    OpenAI API key for authentication

* ``OPENAI_API_BASE`` (optional)
    Custom API endpoint URL

* ``OPENAI_API_VERSION`` (optional)
    Specific API version to use 

Advanced Usage
------------

Complex Schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use Pydantic for complex schemas:

.. code-block:: python

    from typing import Literal
    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

    class Character(BaseModel):
        name: str
        age: int = Field(minimum=0, maximum=150)
        occupation: str
        skills: list[str]

    class MovieAnalysis(BaseModel):
        title: str
        rating: float = Field(minimum=0, maximum=10)
        summary: str
        themes: list[str]

    # Convert to JSON Schema
    schema = MovieAnalysis.model_json_schema()

    async def analyze_movie():
        try:
            async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
                messages=[
                    {"role": "system", "content": "Analyze this movie."},
                    {"role": "user", "content": "Analyze 'The Matrix'"}
                ],
                schema=schema
            ):
                analysis = MovieAnalysis(**chunk)
                print(f"Analyzing {analysis.title}...")
                for character in analysis.characters:
                    print(f"- {character.name}: {character.role}")
        except ValidationError as e:
            print(f"Validation error: {e}")

Error Handling
------------

The library provides comprehensive error handling:

.. code-block:: python

    from openai_structured.errors import (
        StreamBufferError,
        StreamInterruptedError,
        ValidationError,
        TokenLimitError
    )

    try:
        async for chunk in async_openai_structured_stream(
            client=client,
            model="gpt-4o-2024-08-06",
            output_schema=OutputSchema,
            system_prompt="Analyze this text",
            user_prompt="Sample text to analyze",
        ):
            process_chunk(chunk)
    except ValueError as e:
        if "token limit" in str(e).lower():
            print(f"Token limit exceeded: {e}")
            print("Consider reducing input size or using a model with larger context")
        else:
            raise
    except StreamBufferError as e:
        print(f"Buffer overflow: {e}")
    except StreamInterruptedError as e:
        print(f"Stream interrupted: {e}")
    except ValidationError as e:
        print(f"Validation error: {e}")
    except APIError as e:
        print(f"API error: {e}")
    finally:
        await client.close()
