examples/README.md, before:

# openai-structured Examples

This directory contains examples demonstrating various features of the `openai-structured` library.

## Basic Examples

### streaming.py

Demonstrates the default streaming behavior with structured output:

- Processing large responses piece by piece
- Buffer management and cleanup
- Progress tracking
- Error handling

### schema_validation.py

Shows how to use Pydantic's validation features with structured output:

- Custom field types and validators
- Complex nested models
- Field constraints and descriptions
- Schema validation errors

### error_handling.py

Comprehensive error handling examples:

- Stream interruption handling
- Buffer overflow management
- Parse error recovery
- Rate limiting and retries
- Network error handling
- Resource cleanup

## CLI Examples

### cli_basic.py

Basic CLI usage examples:

```bash
# Simple analysis
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Analyze the text" \
  --template "Content: {input}" \
  --file input=data.txt \
  --schema-file analysis_schema.json

# Multiple files
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Compare the files" \
  --template "File A: {file_a}\nFile B: {file_b}" \
  --file file_a=a.txt \
  --file file_b=b.txt \
  --schema-file comparison_schema.json \
  --output-file result.json

# With validation
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Analyze code" \
  --template "Code: {source}" \
  --file source=code.py \
  --schema-file code_analysis_schema.json \
  --validate-schema \
  --verbose
```

### cli_advanced.py

Advanced CLI usage:

- Custom model configurations
- Token limit management
- Progress monitoring
- Error handling
- Output formatting

## Production Examples

### production_setup.py

Production-ready setup with:

- Proper error handling
- Retries with backoff
- Rate limiting
- Resource cleanup
- Logging configuration
- Monitoring hooks

### logging_setup.py

Advanced logging configuration:

- Structured logging
- Multiple handlers
- Log rotation
- Error tracking
- Performance monitoring

## Running the Examples

1. Install the package:

```bash
pip install openai-structured
```

2. Set your OpenAI API key:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key
```

3. Run any example:

```bash
python examples/streaming.py
python examples/cli_basic.py
# etc.
```

## Notes

- All examples use streaming by default
- Examples use the latest `gpt-4o-2024-08-06` model
- Some examples create temporary files
- Error examples demonstrate failure handling
- Logging examples create log files

Commit message:

docs: standardize OpenAI Structured Outputs references
- Add consistent capitalization of "OpenAI Structured Outputs"
- Include links to official OpenAI documentation
- Update model descriptions to clarify Structured Outputs support
- Enhance code examples with clearer comments
- Improve documentation clarity across README, examples, and RST files

examples/README.md, after:

# openai-structured Examples

This directory contains examples demonstrating various features of the `openai-structured` library for working with [OpenAI Structured Outputs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling).

## Basic Examples

### streaming.py

Demonstrates streaming with OpenAI Structured Outputs:

- Processing large structured responses piece by piece
- Buffer management and cleanup
- Progress tracking
- Error handling

### schema_validation.py

Shows how to use Pydantic's validation features with OpenAI Structured Outputs:

- Custom field types and validators
- Complex nested models
- Field constraints and descriptions
- Schema validation errors

### error_handling.py

Comprehensive error handling examples:

- Stream interruption handling
- Buffer overflow management
- Parse error recovery
- Rate limiting and retries
- Network error handling
- Resource cleanup

## CLI Examples

### cli_basic.py

Basic CLI usage examples:

```bash
# Simple analysis
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Analyze the text" \
  --template "Content: {input}" \
  --file input=data.txt \
  --schema-file analysis_schema.json

# Multiple files
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Compare the files" \
  --template "File A: {file_a}\nFile B: {file_b}" \
  --file file_a=a.txt \
  --file file_b=b.txt \
  --schema-file comparison_schema.json \
  --output-file result.json

# With validation
openai-structured \
  --system-prompt "Analyze code" \
  --template "Code: {source}" \
  --file source=code.py \
  --schema-file code_analysis_schema.json \
  --validate-schema \
  --verbose
```

### cli_advanced.py

Advanced CLI usage:

- Custom model configurations
- Token limit management
- Progress monitoring
- Error handling
- Output formatting

## Production Examples

### production_setup.py

Production-ready setup for OpenAI Structured Outputs with:

- Proper error handling
- Retries with backoff
- Rate limiting
- Resource cleanup
- Logging configuration
- Monitoring hooks

### logging_setup.py

Advanced logging configuration:

- Structured logging
- Multiple handlers
- Log rotation
- Error tracking
- Performance monitoring

## Running the Examples

1. Install the package:

```bash
pip install openai-structured
```

2. Set your OpenAI API key:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY=your-api-key
```

3. Run any example:

```bash
python examples/streaming.py
python examples/cli_basic.py
# etc.
```

## Notes

- All examples use streaming by default
- Examples use the latest `gpt-4o-2024-08-06` model with OpenAI Structured Outputs
- Some examples create temporary files
- Error examples demonstrate failure handling
- Logging examples create log files
